Good afternoon.
Welcome to the talk on
multitasking this year.
I'm Dave Myszewski.
I manage an iOS performance team
and I'll be joined by my colleague,
Charles Srisuwananukorn.
So today we're going to
tell you about multitasking.
So, and in particular, so multitasking,
as you know,
provides a lot of great services to
enable your application to run in the
background when it needs to and to
ensure that applications don't run in
the background when they don't need to.
So when your application
goes to the background,
they're suspended and not running,
which means that we have really
great performance because you don't
have a lot of things going on in
the background that are using,
you know,
you don't have 50 things using 1% of
the CPU and a bad user experience.
And it's also been really
terrific for battery life.
So applications run when they need to
and don't run when they don't need to.
Multitasking is supported
on all iOS devices today.
So the iPad, iPad 2,
all versions of the iPhone
that iOS 5 supports,
and the iPod Touch as well.
So in 4.2, everything supports it.
And today we're not going to tell you
a whole lot about particular APIs.
We're going to focus our
session today on how to make a
really great multitasking app.
So we had a couple of talks
last year that if you want to
review on iTunes after the show,
you can do that.
But today we're going to focus
on how you make your application
really optimized for multitasking.
And we have a few different ways
in which we'll talk about making
your application really great.
So to start out,
we'll review the application lifecycle,
and then talk about making that great
application that's in the background.
And then talk a little bit
about the multitasking services,
including the new services in iOS 5.
So we'll start out with
the application lifecycle.
Things work by and large
like they did with iOS 4,
except with one change that
we'll get to in a moment.
But when you're sitting here on the home
screen and your user launches the app,
of course the application isn't running.
You will get, when the application
comes to the foreground,
an application did finish
launching with options delegate,
and then the application becomes active.
So that's the lifecycle that you're all
used to and has been the same since 2.0.
Then when you have some
sort of interruption,
which will become a lot less
common in iOS 5 because of
our new notification center,
but it still happens in, say,
the multitasking UI,
your application will get the
application will resign active callback.
So something's interrupting
your application,
and your application knows to
maybe stop playing that game
or to perhaps change its UI.
And then when you change
from your application,
you'll start out as the active app.
Your application goes into the background
because you hit the home button.
To get there, the application,
you'll get an application
did resign active callback.
And then your application
goes into the background and
runs for some amount of time.
So this is when you will want to do
things like save your state and clean
up things in your application to
prepare it to go into the background.
So you'll get an application
did enter background callback.
And then once you're done with that,
Springboard will suspend the application.
Now, you don't get a notification
that tells you you're suspended.
Just presume that when you finish with
the application did enter background
that your application is finished
doing everything that it needs to
do when it goes into the background.
So there's no notification here.
Then switching to an
app is very symmetric.
When you're suspended,
the user launches your app either through
the app switcher or the home screen.
You'll get the app--again,
no notification that you started running.
And the moment you start running,
you'll get an application will
enter foreground delegate callback.
And then, of course,
your application will become active.
So that's the same basic
lifecycle for an application.
And that's the same as
what it was in iOS 4.
Now in iOS 5, we're doing one thing a
little bit differently,
and that's we're handling
the device lock differently.
So what we found with iOS 4 is
that if you lock over the device,
the application continued running
while the device is locked.
Now iOS, you know,
even when the screen is off,
is a fairly dynamic system.
It will wake up periodically
to handle things like push
notifications that happen,
or if you have a region monitoring with,
say, the new Reminders UI that allows
you to do location-based reminders,
or some other third-party application
that does a similar thing,
then the application--then the device
will wake up and do some amount
of work with the screen is off.
And as an application,
you don't necessarily know how
to distinguish that lock screen
where in the past you would get
an application did resign active,
or application will resign active,
from your application really being idle.
So what we had is that some
application might talk to the network
inadvertently or enable the GPS,
and things like that had
an impact on battery life.
So what we did now is when you
touch that lock screen button,
you'll get the application
will resign active like before,
but now your application
will enter the background.
And then when the user
hits the home button,
the application will say suspended.
So we won't change from that suspended
state until the user unlocks the
device and goes to your application.
So that's one thing
that's different in iOS 5.
iOS 5 than iOS 4,
and it helps improve our battery life.
Now of course for all of these
app lifecycle notifications,
or delegate callbacks rather,
there's a corresponding notification.
These are all unchanged from iOS 5.
So for your application
did enter background,
for example,
you may have some cache that's
very well divorced from your
UI application delegate.
And for something like that
where you want to clear a cache,
you can use the UI application
did enter background notification.
And there's a few other ways that
you can handle caches that we'll get
to a little bit later in the talk.
Now that covers the case where
you go into the background and
you don't continue running.
But of course we provide various
facilities for you to continue
running into the background.
So you can finish the current
task that you're in the middle of.
You can finish playing audio,
for example, until the user pauses you.
We provide some external
triggers for you to run on.
So things like location notifications
and newsstand is another one that will
allow you to download some content in
the background if you're a magazine user.
So you can run in the background if
you're a magazine developer or newspaper.
And we have in VoIP apps some
targeted networking events
that wake up the devices.
So that's kind of three general ways
in which you run in the background.
The most common one, though,
is what we call task completion.
And that merely lets you finish
doing whatever it was that the
user was doing in the foreground.
So you might finish uploading photos,
for example.
So when the user is switched
away from their app,
they press the home button.
Then you're in that
background running state.
But rather than being suspended,
you continue finishing those photos.
And then once you've uploaded the photos,
then your upload is completed.
You declare that you're done.
And then your application is suspended.
And background audio works very
much the same way in that the user
is playing audio in the foreground,
then the user presses the home button,
and you continue playing audio
until the user declares that
they're done by pausing the music,
or maybe you get an interruption,
like a phone call.
And then the application is suspended.
So all of our multitasking modes,
whether it's audio or
location or task completion,
provide mechanisms like this that let
you keep doing what you were doing
until you're done with the task at hand,
or until the user declares
that they're done,
like they're done playing audio.
[Transcript missing]
So first I'm going to start with
system resources and talk about how
iOS manages system resources and tries
to mediate access to these resources.
Some of the APIs that you may not
be familiar with that would help
you manage these resources and
some other things that your app
can do to help manage resources.
And in particular I'm going to focus on
a couple of particularly tricky areas,
and specifically memory and OpenGL.
And then after that Dave's going
to come back and tell us more about
gracefully resuming from the background.
So let's talk about system resources.
The way to think about system resources
is that all the system resources on a
device are shared by all applications.
Like foreground applications and
background applications all share
these really limited resources.
And so the more resources you use,
the fewer resources are
left for other people.
So just as if you're sharing
a birthday cake or something,
the more birthday cake you have,
the less there is for everybody else.
And so to keep everybody happy,
you want to make sure
everybody has a birthday cake.
And so the last thing you want to be
is that kid who eats all the cake and
doesn't leave anything for anybody else.
So again, all applications on the device,
foreground, background,
system applications,
share system resources.
And this includes resources that
you may already be familiar with,
like CPU and IO.
There's a limited amount
of bandwidth to flash.
And so you have to share that bandwidth
among the different applications.
And memory.
But it also includes some
of the other things that you
might want to be aware of.
So again, there's some resources that
you may not have thought of,
like the GPU and network.
So again, especially on these devices
over the cellular network,
there's a very limited amount of
bandwidth that needs to be shared
among different applications.
Now, iOS will prioritize some of these
resources for the foreground app.
So when your application
is in the foreground and,
say, it wants some time on the CPU,
at the same time that a background
application wants some time on the CPU,
iOS will actually prioritize
your application higher and
give your app time on the CPU.
Similarly, with I/O,
if your app wants to do I/O while a
background application wants to do I/O,
the foreground application wins.
Now, there are also some resources that
are just really difficult to manage,
and so they're just completely
off limits while your
application is in the background,
and in particular, the GPU.
So if your application tries
to use OpenGL while it's
running in the background,
the system can't efficiently
manage that between the foreground
and background applications,
and so it'll terminate your application.
So this is something to keep in mind.
And other resources, specifically memory,
the system does try to
manage as best as it can,
but there's a lot that your application
can do to help the system manage memory.
Some APIs that it could use,
and also just freeing up memory
so that when your application
is suspended in the background,
there's more memory for other
apps on the system to use.
And so that brings us now to memory,
and I want to talk more
about this in detail.
So again,
apps share a very limited amount
of memory on these devices.
So iOS 5 supports everything from an
iPod Touch to an iPhone to an iPad,
and they all have different
amounts of memory,
and some of them have a very
limited amount of memory.
And so you have to keep this in mind
when you're developing your application.
And iOS will ensure that the device
has the memory it needs to function.
So even though there's this limited
amount of memory on the device,
it will try to make sure that
the foreground application
or a system processor,
whatever that needs memory,
can get that memory when it needs it.
And to do that, you know,
it does a couple of things.
It first sends running
apps memory warnings,
asking them to free up memory.
And if it still needs to reclaim
memory when it's under memory pressure,
then it starts terminating applications
one by one until it has enough
memory for the foreground app or
the system process to proceed.
And so you kind of want to
avoid it being terminated,
if possible,
because then your application
has to relaunch completely when
it comes back to the foreground.
So I want to talk a little bit
more about memory warnings.
If you haven't encountered
memory warnings before,
quite simply,
iOS sends running applications
a notification saying,
"Hey, memory is tight right now.
"Please free up some memory." And so
this is the first thing it does
to try and free up some memory.
And we did a lot of work in iOS
5 with the memory warning system,
and your application should now
only get memory warnings when it's
absolutely crucial to free memory.
So when you get that warning, you know,
do please free up as much memory
as you can because you may not get
another chance to free up memory.
Now,
I want to revisit that first point a bit.
I said iOS sends notifications to
running applications to free memory.
And as Dave said earlier,
when your application is
sitting in the background,
it's suspended,
so it's not actually running on the CPU.
And this is a bit of a subtle point
because if you're using a whole bunch
of memory when your application goes
in the background and is suspended,
it'll be sitting there in the
background using that memory,
and it won't get a chance to
actually free that memory.
So when should you actually
free up your memory?
Well, when your app goes into the
background before it's suspended.
So at that point,
you should just free up as
much of your memory as you can.
But there's this big tradeoff
that you should keep in mind.
To help your--to help your
application free up memory,
iOS itself and some of the frameworks
in iOS will actually help--will
free up some memory on your behalf,
and we'll talk a little bit about
And what's more,
applications that end up using less
than 16 megabytes of dirty memory
while sitting in the background will
actually have their dirty memory
written out to disk and will have
almost no memory footprint at all when
they're sitting in the background.
And that number is subject to change.
And here's that tradeoff that I alluded
to earlier and didn't talk much about,
but when you're freeing up memory,
you should always balance the
memory footprint in the background
with the speed to resume.
Because if you end up freeing so
much memory when your application
goes to the background,
that it takes just as long
to resume your application as
to relaunch it from scratch,
then we haven't really gained much.
So now I want to talk a little bit more
about what iOS and the system does for
you and for your application as your
application goes in the background so
you can take better advantage of iOS.
So first I want to talk
about view backing stores.
So imagine that this multitasking icon
that we have here is a custom drawn view.
So it's a subclass of UIView.
It overrides DrawRect and it uses
core graphics to draw the graphics
that you see here on the screen.
So let's break this up
into its constituent parts.
hearts.
There's that UI view,
which again is that subclass custom view.
And then there's the bitmap image data
that's actually displayed to the screen.
So that multitasking icon,
the blue icon now is that image data.
And it turns out that in
addition to these two pieces,
there's also a CA layer.
So UI view has a CA layer,
and the CA layer actually has
the big bitmap backing store.
And it turns out that every UI view
on the system has a CA layer.
And then these custom views that override
DrawRect and draw their own contents
have what we call this backing store,
this bitmap backing store.
And the Bitmap Backing
Store is actually managed by
Windows Server and Core Animation.
And when your application
goes into the background,
it can actually mark that backing
store as something that can be
reclaimed by iOS while your application
is suspended if it needs it.
So even if your application is suspended,
there's this big chunk of memory in
your application space that iOS can
actually reclaim if it needs to.
And it turns out that this
backing store can be pretty big.
And of the three pieces here,
the UI view, the CA layer,
and the backing store,
the backing store usually ends up
being the biggest part of this.
And so you can imagine that this
is--this can free up quite a bit of
memory or make quite a bit of memory
available to the system when your
application is in the background.
If the contents or the backing store was
reclaimed and used for something else
while your app was in the background,
when your application
resumes to the foreground,
iOS will call the draw
rect again to get it back.
to get the image data to
display to the screen.
So another thing that iOS will do for
you is related to the UI image cache.
Some of you may know that
UIKit will actually cache images
loaded with UI image image named.
Now, images can be really big and
take up a lot of memory on iOS.
In fact, they'll take up about four bytes
per pixel is a good rule of thumb.
But in addition,
they take a long time to load.
They take a long time to decompress
and load and display on the screen.
So UIKit will actually cache
these images in memory that
you load with this image named.
So as you load images one by one,
they just keep piling up in memory.
And you can--as you can imagine,
it piles up pretty quickly and
grows pretty--pretty quickly.
But when your application
goes into the background,
UIKit will actually purge the
cache completely and reclaim
all of that memory for you.
And in a similar vein,
several frameworks in iOS will
actually cache data and memory
to avoid going to the flash,
or going to the network,
or doing an expensive recalculation.
And so these are frameworks like
SQLite and Core Data and NSCache,
which we'll talk about later,
and a bunch of other frameworks.
And when your application
goes into the background,
those frameworks will just
empty those caches for you.
So those are a few things that iOS
will actually do for you when your
application enters the background to
try and reduce your memory footprint.
But now I want to talk about a
few things that your app can do to
free up some memory and make that
memory available to other apps
while your app's in the background.
And first I want to talk
about UI image views.
So as we talked about earlier,
images can take up a lot of memory.
And UI image views, like all UI views,
have a CA layer.
But in this case,
instead of having a back-end store
that's managed by Core Animation,
the CA layer will use the contents
of the image or the image data
directly to display to the screen.
What this means is that these images
are not reclaimed automatically when
your app goes to the background.
So if you're displaying this
big 8 megapixel image in your
view hierarchy somewhere,
you're going to be using that much
memory to keep that image in memory
even when you're in the background.
So you should detach large images
from your view hierarchy right before
your application suspends and free
up that memory and free up the image.
And especially if those
UI images are off screen,
because if it's deep in a
navigation controller or in a tab
controller on an unselected tab,
when your application resumes,
you don't even need that
image to actually resume.
But again, these images take a long
time to decompress and load,
so you should keep that in mind.
If you are showing a really big
UI image view when your application
suspends and you get rid of it,
when your application comes
back to the foreground,
then you have to pay the cost
of decompressing the image
before you can display it.
So again, that's part of that tradeoff
that you have to keep in mind.
Like, the more you release,
the more time you will need to resume.
You may want to make sure that your
images are properly scaled before
putting them into the UI image views,
which could save you both the
memory and the time to decompress.
So your application,
similar to how some of iOS's
frameworks caches data,
might actually cache some
data for the same reasons.
To avoid hitting the flash,
to avoid going to the network,
to avoid some expensive calculations.
And these caches can also build up.
And so one of the other things
your application can do to help
the system manage memory is to
flush your application caches
as you go to the background.
But again, not if resuming will take just
as long as relaunching because
of flushing all these caches.
An interesting compromise though is
to use NSCache with NSPurchableData.
So NSCache caches objects in memory.
You know, not much of a surprise there.
But it also manages and evicts
these objects as necessary.
So as it hits some limits or
determines that it's a good time
to evict some of these objects,
it will actually automatically
evict them for you and manage that.
And there are different ways of
configuring its eviction policy.
And when you go into the background,
it'll actually evict all the
objects in your NS cache for you,
so you're not paying the
memory cost for all of that.
Now where NS Cache really
shines is if you end up using
it with NS purgeable data.
So with NS purgeable data objects,
you specify when you're using
the data in the NS purgeable data
and when you're done with it.
And when you're done with
the NS purgeable data object,
the memory for that NS purgeable
data object becomes reclaimable,
very much like the backing stores for
those custom views that we saw earlier.
And so iOS can actually take the memory
associated with those NS purgeable
data objects if memory is tight.
And so if you put an NS purgeable
data object into an NS cache,
then it will actually stick around
in the cache because it can actually
be reclaimed by the OS even when
your application is suspended.
And so this has the benefit of
if your applica-- if the user is
switching quickly between your
application and another application,
as long as memory doesn't become tight or
there's no memory pressure between them,
when your application comes back
to the front end or the foreground,
much of this memory may
actually still be there.
So again, you specify when you want to
use this NS purgeable data
and when you're done with it.
And when you're done with
the NS purgeable data,
they become reclaimable by the OS.
So another API or set of
APIs that you may want to consider
using are memory map files.
So let's say you want to read
a bunch of data from a file
like this JPEG over here.
Well, one option is to malloc a really
big buffer or alloc init and
NSData and just read it all
from disk into this big buffer.
But the problem is that this big
buffer is memory that the OS can't
touch because it's part of your
application's virtual memory.
If you instead memory map the file,
what happens is that the OS will
reserve some space in your virtual
memory address space for that file.
But it doesn't actually assign any
physical memory for the file yet.
It's only when you start touching
the pages and using the pages
for that file that it actually
brings in the data from the file
and make it resident into memory.
And what's really cool is that
when there's memory pressure
and the OS needs some memory
to use for some other purpose,
if this file is mapped read only,
then it can just go ahead and take
one of these pages and throw it away
and use that page for something else,
because the next time your
application touches that page,
it can just bring it
back in from the file.
So it can do this even
if your application is
suspended in the background.
So these memory map files are kind of a
nicer way of reading in data from files
when your application is suspended.
So consider mapping files into
memory instead of reading them
into in-memory buffers if possible.
And to do so, you can use any number
of the APIs we have,
like NSData,
data with contents of map file.
And the real benefit is that
iOS can reclaim these pages
from map files automatically,
even if your application is suspended.
So to summarize our best
practices around memory,
free up memory when you
receive a memory warning.
You may not get another
chance to free up memory,
so please do respond
to the memory warnings.
Free up memory when your application
goes into the background as well,
right before suspending.
Remove UI image views from
the view hierarchy unless the
decompression will be a problem
when your application resumes.
And consider using NSCache and memory
map files and other memory-friendly
APIs that we have in iOS.
But always throughout all of this,
remember the tradeoff to balance
the memory footprint that you have
in the background with how long it
takes to resume your application.
So with that,
I want to show now a short demo of
some of the things we were talking
about using the VM Tracker instrument.
So I'm going to switch over to the iPad.
And I wrote a couple of really
simple applications here,
and they're somewhat contrived,
but they show the things that
I wanted to talk about here.
So the first one is this
custom view application.
So you can't quite tell,
but this custom view here that I have
is a custom subclass of UIView,
but it's really, really big.
It's 8,000 by 8,000 pixels.
So you would never
create a view this big.
But the backing store for this
view takes up 8,000 by 8,000
pixels times four bytes per pixel,
so about 256 megs.
And so then it just,
it overrides drawRect and it draws
that little apple using core graphics.
So let's take a look at what this looks
like in VM Tracker in Instruments.
So I have Instruments here.
And I'm going to select a blank document,
launch the library,
and find the VM Tracker instrument.
And I'm just going to go ahead
and drag that into Instruments.
And I'm going to attach to
this custom view process here,
so I can inspect its
virtual memory space,
and click record.
So one thing to note about VM Tracker,
and let me see if I can
zoom in here for you.
Oh, I can't.
Is that it will snapshot the virtual
memory space of the application at
a regular interval if you set this,
if you set an interval here.
So see, so here I have it set to
snapshot every three seconds.
And then it'll present
to you some summary,
some summary statistics of all the
memory used by your application.
So in this case,
the summary statistics show that
I have 245 megabytes of dirty memory.
And dirty memory in general is
memory that iOS can't touch and
can't reclaim automatically.
And I'm going to switch
here to the regions map,
which will show each of the
individual regions in the virtual
memory space for this application,
and then sort by dirty size.
And at the top here,
I have a region of type core
animation that's 244 megabytes large.
So this is the backing store for
that view that we saw earlier.
So now I'm on the iPad and
I'm going to go ahead and send
that back to the background.
And you can see when I did that,
that this little flag up here
showed up in Instruments.
And if I click on that flag,
it says that my application
was background task suspended.
So it went to the background
and it's now suspended.
If I look back down
here in the regions map,
you'll see that I actually still have
that big 244 megabyte region sitting
around while my application is suspended.
Now,
this isn't really a big problem because,
again,
we've marked that as reclaimable while
the application is in the background.
So I'm going to switch back
to the iPad and show you the
other application that I wrote.
So I'm going to launch now
this Photo Viewer application,
and it's just this tab
controller with two tabs.
And I'm going to tap the second tab,
which will show a 21 megapixel photo.
And so, again, this will take up a
huge amount of memory,
about 80 megabytes of memory
to show 21 megapixels.
But I'm doing this to show you
what happens when there's a bit
of memory pressure on the system.
And you saw also how long it
took to actually load that.
So let's switch back to instruments.
and look into the region map,
and you'll see that,
if you could read it,
the big 250 megabyte core
animation region is gone.
And if I switch back to the summary,
you'll see that my dirty size for my
entire application is now 1.72 megabytes.
So even though my application
was suspended and never actually
came back to the foreground,
we were able to reclaim all that dirty
memory and now it's just sitting in the
background with very little dirty memory.
So this is the number you
want to optimize for when your
application is in the background.
So I'm going to stop this trace and
start Let's start a new trace now.
and do the same thing loading
the VM Tracker instrument
into my workspace here.
This time I'm going to attach
to the photo viewer process that
we just saw and start recording.
And so now you see this
application has a dirty size,
a total dirty size of about 85 megabytes,
which is also really big.
And so I'm going to switch over to the
regions map and then sort by dirty again.
And you see there's this one region
here that's 80 megabytes large.
And the type is memory tag 70.
And memory tag 70 turns out to be the,
to be image memory.
This is memory that iOS has allocated
to decompress an image into.
And so that's,
that's the actual image data,
the bitmap data for the image,
the 21 megapixel image that was
being displayed on the screen.
So I'm going to send this
to the background now.
And so you can see again that flag
showed up and said my application's
background task suspended.
And then now I'm going to
launch that custom view again.
And you're going to have to trust
me that I actually launched it,
because you can see that this
memory tag 70 with 80 megabytes
dirty is still sitting around.
So this is an example of those UI image
views not being reclaimed as your
application is sitting in the background.
So this is something else you
need to keep in mind when you're
developing your application.
And now I want to talk about
another tricky resource,
the GPU in OpenGL.
So as I said earlier, you know,
the GPU is a really difficult
resource for iOS to manage,
so it terminates applications in the
background if they try to use the GPU,
if they try to use OpenGL.
So it's really important if you're
developing a game or using OpenGL,
you probably have some
kind of animation timer.
It's really important to stop
that animation timer as your
application goes into the background.
Because if you don't stop
that animation timer,
then you'll get a crash log
that looks something like this.
So in this case,
this application ended up
calling glFinish while it was
running in the background.
Then after a bunch of calls,
eventually it hit
glrReturnNotPermittedKillClient,
which is an indication that
your application tried to use
gl when it wasn't supposed to.
And so the application is terminated.
So this is a pretty
tricky thing to get right,
so I'm going to actually walk
through a code sample for
pausing the animation while your
application is in the background.
So most of this code is from
the GL template in Xcode.
So you can go and check out the
GL template if you want to pull out
some of this code to use in your app.
But this is from a view that uses
OpenGL to draw to the screen.
And it has this method, startAnimation,
on the view.
And this method sets up the
animation timer that will
end up drawing to the screen.
And to do so,
it creates this display link.
And a display link is very much like an
NS timer in that you give it a selector,
and then the display link just calls
back that selector whenever it's
advantageous to draw to the screen.
And so in that selector,
this view will just do
all of its GL drawing.
Then it configures the timer,
the display link,
and then adds it to the run loop.
So once it's added it to the run loop,
then the timer starts calling that
selector back to draw to the screen.
And then similarly it has
the stop animation method.
And the stop animation method
just invalidates the timer
and then sets it to no.
It releases it.
So now that we have a way
to start and stop animation,
we want to do so at
the appropriate times.
And this particular code is going to
use the multitasking notifications that
we saw earlier and not the explicit
callbacks on the UI application delegate.
So in this view,
when this view wakes up from its nib,
the first thing it does,
or one of the first things it does
is it registers for the application
will resign active notification.
So you'll get this notification any
time we'll call the application will
resign active callback on the delegate,
which is whenever the application
goes into the background,
when the user brings
up the multitasking UI,
whenever an alert style notification
pops up over your application.
All these cases,
you'll get this callback and you
really want to stop and pause your
So in the method that
observes this notification,
all this view does is
calls stop animation,
if appropriate.
So now that the animation's paused,
we probably want to resume it
when it's appropriate to do so.
So to do that,
we're going to call the UI application
to become active notification.
And you get this when your application
comes back to the foreground,
when the user dismisses
the multitasking UI,
if the user had brought
up the multitasking UI,
or when the user dismisses an alert style
notification as we talked about earlier.
And then simply in the observer,
it calls startAnimation.
Now,
one other case that your application,
your GL game,
has to handle properly is termination.
When your application terminates,
you actually don't get that
will resign active callback.
But your application runs in
the background for a short
period of time to clean up.
And if your application uses GL at any
time when it's running in the background,
it'll get terminated.
So this view will also register
for the UI application will
terminate notification.
And then, not a big surprise,
in the observer, it calls stop animation.
And so this prevents your application
from being terminated ungracefully
when it is about to be terminated.
[Transcript missing]
Now games, they're kind of divided
into two categories.
One is the turn-by-turn games.
These are, I think,
the easiest to preserve
state in that you moved your
checkerboard or your chess piece,
or maybe you got past one
little state in the level,
and you kind of save your
state after each turn.
So once something changes,
maybe it's a game where
people think a lot about,
like a Scrabble-type game,
people expect that when
they return to your app,
if after they finish the turn,
that they return to
exactly where they were.
So it's a good idea for
those sorts of games just to
save when something changes.
But for some sorts of games, like, say,
a first-person shooter or some
other very heavy-duty OpenGL games,
you have things that are
changing at 60 frames per second.
And for those types of games,
you really want to be able to do all your
graphics work during that 1/16th of a
second that you have to generate a frame.
And you don't want to be
saving your state all the time.
So for those sorts of games,
it's best to save at really
important transitions.
So some of those may be you change
from one level to the other,
or maybe you accomplish some
sort of goal or achievement,
or in between levels
is another good place.
And of course,
you always want to save state
in the background so that when
the user returns to the app,
they'll get to right at that
point where they left off.
So that's a few tips for games.
Beyond state preservation,
there are some things that you
want to do to make sure that
your app is fully functional and
works properly when it resumes.
So, when you go into the background,
maybe you had some networking socket
that was open downloading some data,
those may be disconnected
while you are suspended.
If you have a phone,
you're constantly--you
may drive down this road,
you may go through a tunnel,
lots of things can happen
while you're in the background.
And so,
you need to assume that that socket
may disconnect at some point while
you're suspended and you may have to
candle some error conditions on resume
or maybe reissue that networking query.
And it's also important for any
application that does a lot of
networking that listens to things on
the other end that suspended apps,
because they're suspended,
won't be able to accept
incoming connections.
So, if you have some sort
of listening socket,
make sure that you close that on
suspend so that clients don't think
that somebody is available to talk to.
and then of course
reopen those on resume.
And this is much the same
as a Bonjour connections.
If you have a Bonjour connection,
or a Bonjour operation that's going,
you need to assume that
they'll be canceled when the
application is suspended.
So you have two people
talking to each other,
you don't want your
application to go silent.
So you want to kind of cleanly tear
down the Bonjour connection or service
and then restart them on resume.
There's a lot of detail that was covered
in the Bonjour talk about this that
I'd suggest checking out if you have
an app that makes heavy use of Bonjour.
And then of course there's
system notifications.
So lots of things can
happen in the background.
User may--the most common one is they
may go to your--our settings app,
change some setting in the
application--in the settings
app and then return to your app.
Or, you know, the user may change their
language and there are a bunch
of other things that can happen
while you're in the background,
but we don't want to have all
background apps do a lot of work every
time that we have a notification.
So rather than sending
all these notifications,
either while you're in the background
or trying to replay all of them
when you enter the foreground,
we instead coalesce and
queue up the notifications.
So if you change your setting, you know,
if the user changes your setting five
different times or changes the language
five different times or take some other
action that triggers a notification,
then we will take all of those,
we'll queue them up and then on
resume we'll deliver them to you.
So that means that you won't get this
giant replay of a ton of notifications,
but still get them when you resume.
So just a couple of common ones.
I think the most common one is the
NSUserDefaultsDidChangeNotification,
which you'll get when the user goes
into the Settings app and changes
a setting for your application.
And there's also language
or locale changes.
And a much,
much longer list of notification that's
in the documentation of all sorts of
various things that can change while
your application is in the background.
So if you listen to those anywhere,
then you'll get them on resume.
Now last we want to cover a couple
of little tidbits about several
of the multitasking services.
So the first one is task completion.
So it's the second most
important multitasking scenario,
the first being fast app switching.
And one of the great things is
we have so many apps adopting
it that users now expect it.
So if you're an app that
downloads something,
like something, say a 30 meg file,
maybe it's a book,
maybe it's something else,
then users really expect that if
they start the operation while
your app is in the foreground,
it will continue in the background.
And so task completion
isn't just a good idea now.
It's actually a fairly
strong requirement for users.
You know, it's worked out really well
for a lot of applications.
And so users will expect all applications
to handle it--to handle this very,
very gracefully and just finish
whatever you're downloading.
But of course,
we only do this for the tasks
where you really need to-- to
continue the downloading and try
to finish as quickly as possible.
So don't download a bunch of extra data.
Just download what you need.
And if you can't finish in time,
if for some reason the user goes into
a networking environment that wasn't as
good as when they started or--and you
realize that you can't finish in time,
then you will get an expiration
handler that fires a few seconds
before your application is suspended.
And at that point,
you want to end the background
task and store off where you
were so that you can resume.
When the application resumes.
And ideally,
you would store whatever you downloaded
and just download the remaining bits when
the user goes back to your application.
Now, background audio.
So we provide all these great services
to prioritize audio so that the
user experience is really sane when
you have all these different audio
bits going on around the system
like phone calls and music and alerts,
et cetera.
We provide all sorts of services for
mixing and ducking and integration
with headsets and external speakers.
One thing that we're adding to
iOS 5 is the ability to--you know,
To use what we call the display remote.
So accessories have the ability to
display album artwork and say the
name of the track and some other data.
And applications also get this too
through the media player framework.
So if you're a background
audio application,
you can present the same kinds of
information that we do for the iPod app.
And we think this will
work out really great.
For audio applications,
one important thing for users is to
handle audio interruptions correctly.
So during an interruption,
such as a phone call,
the audio system will silence
an interupted application,
and you'll want to update your
UI appropriately and potentially
resume after the interruption.
So for example,
if you are an application that plays
audio persistently in the background
and the user gets a phone call,
we want you to resume that when the
user is done with the phone call and
continue right where you were left off.
But if you were an application that was
interrupted because the user went to,
say, the iPod application,
then when the user is done with the iPod,
we don't want to begin
the old audio application.
So sometimes we want you to begin
playing after the interruption.
Other times we don't.
So in that beginner interruption,
you might, say,
stop your downloading stream,
update various aspects of your UI,
and stop the visualizations
like Charles mentioned,
stop the OpenGL.
And then when you get the
N interruption with flags method,
you either resume or not,
whether or not this
audio session property,
AV audio session interruption
flag should resume is set.
So we tell you whether
or not you should resume.
All you need to do is
make sure that you do.
So for phone calls, as I mentioned,
the audio should resume,
but if the iPod interrupts,
then the audio shouldn't resume.
So that's audio.
Location tracking has
a few different modes.
There's, of course,
the one that we're familiar
with with GPS apps where you
can continually updating GPS.
But I think two of the really interesting
ones beyond that for location are
the ability to get notified when
significant location changes happen.
So this is a cellular granular
notification that you get.
And then region monitoring,
which is geofencing.
It allows you to get a notification
when you enter or exit specific regions.
And we'll give you a brief idea of
what kind of they mean in pictures.
So for significant location changes,
let's say that you are interested in
whether or not the user got to this
red dot that's halfway across--or
all the way across the city.
The way that this will work is, you know,
as the eye fall on the moon,
as the eye falls on the moon,
you're going to get a notification.
And then,
as the iPhone moves from cell tower
to cell tower throughout the city,
you'll get these location change
events while you're in the background.
So it's great in that you get
updated when important things happen,
and then you can figure out whether or
not you're within that particular region.
So you can figure out whether or not
you're in that particular region.
But what you might really want,
rather than something like this,
is the ability to say,
don't tell me about all these
intermediate states where I'm moving
from cell tower to cell tower.
Just tell me when I'm entering
this last region of interest.
And that's what region
monitoring allows you to do.
So region monitoring says, well,
you may have moved from the cell tower,
but we're paying attention to that and
we're keeping track of where you are.
And then when you finally
hit this last location,
the one that you were interested in,
then you'll get the notification
that you have entered the region.
So this one is a lot better for battery
life for this type of application.
And in fact,
it's the API that we use in the reminders
application for location-based reminders.
It's been available to
third parties since iOS 4.
Now, the key point about that one
is that region monitoring is
only available on iPhone 4.
It's not available on the iPhone 3GS
because we do a lot of clever work with
our baseband to make all of this work.
But all of them will use a lot
less power than GPS applications
that require persistent updates.
Both of them will resume
your suspended applications.
The region monitoring will
just do it less often and
only when you really need it.
And if your application has
been terminated at some point,
then we will relaunch the application
so that you get those notifications.
So it's basically everything that
you would want to be able to see when
significant changes happen or when
you enter and exit specific regions.
Another service new to iOS
5 is the Newsstand service.
So this one you can declare by adding
a newsstand-content to UI background
modes and add the UI newsstand
app key to your Info.plist.
And this provides you the ability
to get about once per day content
downloads via push notifications.
So you send a push
notification and to say that,
hey, content is available,
and then we will launch the
app or wake up your application
and deliver it some payload.
And then your application can schedule
downloads to download the latest issue,
and there's a lot of great
integration to update the icon and
present it in the new newsstand UI.
A few things that you need to be careful
about for news-standard applications.
The first one is you kind of
want to minimize your resource
downloads and make sure that they
go into the caches directory.
So we will hand you a URL for your
download when the download is complete.
And if you need to
decompress that download,
then you want to make sure that that
ends up in your caches directory.
And the reason is that users
tend to fill up their device.
They buy the device that they need
for whatever capacity that they need.
They fill it up somewhat
close to the limit.
And all of the applications
are vying for whatever is left.
So if you have a bunch of
applications that are using,
say,
300 megabytes to store their content,
then they'll be fighting with
each other to some extent.
Because if the device gets full,
we need to try to find some place for
the new content that's coming down.
We want to update the latest content.
And so we'll evict some
news-stand content and other
things as space is needed.
So if your download is smaller,
then there's a greater chance
that the user will return to
your application just as it was.
And of course,
this will reduce battery life
and increase the speed at
which you get the content.
And you'll also want to minimize
the number of downloads.
So we will often tell people to
have one or two different downloads.
So we'll also tell people to have
one or two different downloads.
So to summarize,
multitasking in iOS provides a
lot of different services that
do a lot of work on your behalf.
If you want to go through the details
of each of the multitasking services,
the two talks from last
year are a great resource,
and the developer documentation
has a lot of data as well.
Whenever you are in the foreground,
you want to respond to memory
warnings to be a good citizen,
and minimize your background
memory usage so that more
applications can fit in the system,
and the users will return to your
application and all of the applications
on the system a lot more quickly.
You always want to make sure that
you return exactly to where you were
when you were suspended to provide
that idea to the user to not have
to think about whether or not the
application was resumed or relaunched,
and provide that kind of
transparent application lifecycle.
And of course,
when you do go into the background
and free up your memory usage,
make sure that you balance
that with speed to resume.
So you want to use a
small amount of memory,
but also resume really quickly.
And with all of those things,
and by using all these services,
we think we can give a really great
multitasking experience to users.
So for more information,
you can contact Michael Jurowicz,
and there's a lot of detailed resources
in our developer documentation.
And the couple of sessions
that are worth checking out,
there was a newsstand one earlier today,
and there have been a couple of iOS
performance sessions to also check out.
In particular,
if you want to find out even
more about memory usage,
they cover a lot of details there.
So thanks for coming today,
and enjoy your time at the party tonight.